Hello everyone welcome back to exploring
quantum physics, I'm Charles Clark.
We're going to continue our
discussion of the dynamics of,
rotating polar molecule in electric field.
Okay, so were just pursuing
perturbation theory the usual form and
we found the order Eigen functions,
we knew those already.
We evaluated the first zero and so
now we continue to the next order.
So again, what we did in this example so
far was determine the zeroth-order wave
function, the zeroth-order energy and
then the first-order energy which is
again, it's just a problem of quadrature.
So whatever difficulty you have in doing
integrals, integration is in many
respects a mechanical procedure.
You can easily find the miracle
techniques in many cases and will do for
if we don't have to evaluate.
Now the next step is to get
the first order wave function side.
One, and
that is rather different undertaking.
So here is the equation that defines
the 1st order wave function.
And, I prefer to write
it in this way here.
This is the defining equation of psi 1 and
so
you see it satisfies An inhomogeneous.
Sorry, inhomogeneous linear equation.
Which depends upon sign on.
Now important point to know that
we're going to go on calculate sci one for
a particular case in a moment just to show
you how that's done but once you have sci
one and hand once you have all those hand.
ANd then let's see to try to go
through this without getting
too bogged down in it.
This is the second order equation.
That is the first equation
in which e two appears for
the second order, energy and you see that
there's a second order wave function
as well as a first order zero over
m zero throw it away function.
But once again, when we apply the bra
sine aught to both side of this equation,
then I hope you can see
that this term here and
that term Cancel.
They're the same because
of the formation property.
We're left with this term.
This term vanishes or let me just say
This term is necessarily
orthogonal because
of the orthogonal sign ons [INAUDIBLE] or
if we have E1=0.
Then it turns out that
this term goes away.
And so
we're left with an equation where E2,
which that that E2 passes through and
sine 0 is normalized.
Here's the important equation for the
second-order energy, it's just equal to
the matrix element the potential operating
on the first order wave function.
Projected back onto the 0th order.
So this is the second order energy, is
something that defines response functions,
generally useful, and
that's our target for today.
Now, here's how we're going to solve
the equation for
the first-order perturbe function
which we need in order to get
the lowest non-vanishing energy.
Since we saw that
the first-order energy vanished.
We have to get up to find
something interesting.
So once again, here's the 0th
order Hamiltonian, the potential.
0th order energy and
the 0th order wave function, and
we've established that the 1st
order energy also vanishes.
So now it's relatively straight
forward to write down the equation for
sine one because e0 is 0.
And this the left hand side of the
equation is the angular momentum operator
apply to sine one, is this ratio of
the strengths of the two interactions,
which comes from these
two terms respectively.
And then here you see there is an angle,
the cos of theta and
the normalization,
1 / square root of 4 pi.
Well this means, you see since the,
the angular momentum operator
is spherically symmetric.
It's rotationally symmetric.
When it operates on side one
it returns a particular angle.
That means that we should expect
the angular behavior of the wave
function to be embedded in psi one.
It's only going to be revealed by
the angular momentum operator,
which is spherically symmetric.
It's not going to be imposed by it.
And, indeed, it turns out that cosine
theta is a spherical harmonic with M = 1.
I think you can see that.
That's just because a cosine theta is x
three over r so it satisfies our neumatic,
x three is a solution to cross
the equation as is x three of r.
And it's, this actually, this L,
L is the polynomial order
of that expression that we were looking
at earlier first part of this lecture.
So then, it then follows
that the first order of way
function is [INAUDIBLE]
four.
So you see in this case the existence of
the understanding of angular momentum.
Enables us to solve the first order
equation in a relatively
straight forward way.
Okay, so we've solved for
the first order wave function and
we can now compute the second order energy
by this simple formula and well, okay,
so this number, maybe this number
doesn't mean anything in and of itself.
But let's just ask what it means from the
standpoint of classical electrodynamics.
As we'll see,
this describes a very important quality,
the polarizability of a molecule.
So in electrostatics you learn about
the properties of material objects
when their expose to electromagnetic
fields and one of the classic
problems concerned a conducting
sphere of some finite radius
which you put in an electric field and
then that result in the sphere
acquire in an electric dipole moment.
So there is a re distribution
of charges on the sphere with
the positive charges on one side and
the negative charges on the other.
And this is an empirical long.
There was understood about the electrical
properties matter in ancient time before
there was any known quantitative theory,
how matter response to electricity.
And so it turns out that there's
a very useful convention.
The relationship of the, for weak fields
as a linear response to the dipole moment
induced by an applied electric field
Is just proportional to this constant
that's characteristic of the object for
which for a conducting sphere
is just the cube of its radius.
And that where we use the c.g.s.
Units for the electric field charges.
Now, as it happens it's easy to show
this from the defining relations.
The relationship and the polarizability
and the second order energy.
Is just given in these simple terms.
So this means we can now
use quantum mechanics to
describe the polarized ability of matter.
It's really the first and
to date only fundamental theory
that allows us to understand electrical
properties from first principles.
So when we apply it to
this potassium molecule,
we find that the polarized ability
in the ground state is given by this
expression and this again has
the dimensions of volume, so it
looks like a conducted sphere of that.
25.
Two and a half nanometers in radius.
I'm just using this as
a measure of a number.
I want you to know the following
interesting Interesting to me.
The polarizability which is
the ratio of the induced dipole
moment to the applied field strength,
actually diverges as one
goes to the classical limit.
Taking h bar and going to zero,
so for a rotating molecule,
if we, if we lived in a classical world,
a polarizability would be infinite and
that I think you can see is for
a rotating molecule
of the If there were no
energy cost of localization,
Which is due to the uncertainty principle,
then the the dipole
moment will be localized Instantly
by even the smallest field.
So this shows the least as concerns
the behavior of a rotating polar molecule,
the electrical polarized ability of
matter is definitely a quantum effect.
That is, it ceases exist when and
h bar goes to 0.
We're going to see another example of
that, actually very different type in
the next part of the slide.